---
layout: post
title: What is a dex?
date: 2014-09-25
categories: toolkit
---

The term "dex" comes up rather frequently in astronomy discussions but is
rarely defined in textbooks.  The idea of a dex is straightforward---a dex
is simply an order of magnitude.  More formally, a difference of $$x$$ dex
is a change by a factor of $$10^x$$.  (Although the dex is almost always
used in relation to some other quantity, it can in principle be used to
represent a unitless number.  Thus the number $$x$$ can be written $$10^x$$
dex.)

We use the terms "order of magnitude" and "factor of $$x$$" all the time,
though, so why use the term dex?  The reason is that it comes in handy when
talking about fractions of an order of magnitude.  It's particularly useful
when talking about metallicity.  Metallicity is measured logarithmically
relative to the abundance of metals in the Sun, and accordingly it must be
unitless. 

As an example, let's take a look at [Fischer & Valenti
(2005)](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005ApJ...622.1102F).  In this paper
the authors present a correlation between the metallicity of stars and the
probability that the star hosts a planet---stars with higher metallicities
are more likely to host a planet.  This result is shown in Figure 5:

![Fischer & Valenti (2005)](/images/fischer05.jpg)

We can see that the sample of stars spans a range of [Fe/H] from -0.5 to
0.5, which is one order of magnitude, or one dex.  Although it was just as
easy to say order of magnitude as it was to say dex in that case, suppose we
asked how wide the bins in this histogram were.  There are ten bins spanning
an order of magnitude, so the width of each bin is a factor of $$10^{0.1}
\approx 1.26$$.  This is clumsy, so instead we simply say that each bin has
a width of 0.1 dex.

A dex is completely equivalent to a "bel," "octave," or "decade" which
occasionally come up in engineering and physics.  The bel is much more
widely known with its deci- prefix as the "decibel."  A decibel is therefore
equal to 0.1 dex.  

As a historical footnote, the term "dex" was coined by the astronomer C. W.
Allen of [Allen's Astrophysical
Quantities](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2973692-allen-s-astrophysical-quantities)
fame.  He originally proposed the term in the [1948 meeting of the
International Astronomical
Union](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1948PA.....56..401S) in Zurich and in
1951 published a short
[note](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1951Obs....71..157A) advocating its
use.  The physicist J. B. S. Haldane took up the cause of the dex in 1960
with a short [note](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1960Natur.187..879H)
published in Nature advocating its wider use outside of astronomy and
physics, particularly in biology.  It seems, however, that the biologists
and other scientists were not as keen on the dex because it remains limited
to the jargon of astronomy.
