---
layout: post
title: The Sky in October 2014
image:
  feature: constellations2.jpg
date: 2014-10-01
categories: sky
---

## Eclipses

This month is particularly good for eclipses.  There will be a [total lunar
eclipse](http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/OH/OH2014.html#LE2014Oct08T) on
October 8.  The eclispe will be best viewed from near the Pacific.  From the
west coast of the U.S. the eclipse will begin at around 1 o'clock AM PDT and
will end at 5 o'clock AM PDT.  Those on the east coast of the U.S. will see
the eclipse begin, but the moon will set before before the eclipse ends.

There will also be a [partial solar
eclipse](http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/OH/OH2014.html#SE2014Oct23P) on
October 23 that will be visible from almost all of the U.S. at around 5
o'clock PM EDT.  

## Planets

The planets visible in October will be Mars, Jupiter, and Mercury.  Mars
will be visible early in the evening in towards the west in Ophiuchus and
will set at around 10 o'clock.  Jupiter will rise at around 2 o'clock in the
morning in the constellation Leo.  Mercury will be visible after sunset in
early October and will set about half an hour after sunset.  By the end of
October Mercury will be visible for about an hour and a half just before
sunrise. 

There will be a conjunction between Mercury and Venus on October 17, but
they will be too close to the Sun to observe. 

## Meteor showers

The Orionids will peak October 21 and 22.  The Orionids are a medium
strength shower that typically produce 20-25 meteors perr hour.  The
Southern Taurids peak on October 9 and 10, but are a weak shower (fewer than
5 meteors per hour).  The Northern Taurids begin in late October although
they do not peak until mid-November.  Nevertheless, both Taurids are known
for producing fireballs. 

## Lunar phases

The next full moon will be October 8 (the "Hunter's moon") and the next new
moon will be October 23.
