---
layout: post
title: Apples in a spacecraft
date: 2014-11-20
categories: classics
---

A contribution to a retrospective series on the work of the French
dynamicist Michel Henon by Scott Tremaine inspired me to do a review of an
interesting puzzle in dynamics.

The puzzle goes as follows.  Suppose we are in a spacecraft orbiting the
Earth in a circular orbit.  The spacecraft is rotating such that the same
side of the spacecraft always points toward the Earth.  That is, its
rotation period is equal to its revolution period, just like the Moon's.
Now we release a bushel of apples inside the spacecraft so that they are
floating all around us.  How will the apples be distributed in the
spacecraft after a long time?  We will assume that they are real apples, so
they are inelastic and they are not massive enough for self-gravitation to
be noticeable.  

This question was originally posed by Alfven, but he derived the wrong
answer.  The correct answer was derived by Henon in a short 1978 note.
Henon found that half the apples will end up on the floor of the spacecraft
and half will end up on the ceiling.  (For simplicity, we'll call the side
of the spacecraft closer to Earth the floor, and the other side the
ceiling.)

To see how this answer comes about, consider an apple which starts out
closer to the Earth than the center of gravity of the spacecraft.  It is on
an orbit with a slightly smaller radius than the spacecraft, so its orbital
velocity is larger.  Over time, it will drift forward in the spacecraft
until it hits the front wall.  This collision is inelastic, so the apple
will lose energy and its orbit will shrink.  This means that it will drift
slightly towards the floor of the spacecraft and drift even faster towards
the front of the spacecraft for the next collision.  Over time, the apple
will continually collide with the front wall of the spacecraft, losing
energy, and will end up on the floor of the spacecraft
