---
layout: post
title: The Discovery of the Accelerating Expansion of the Universe
categories: classics
image:
  feature: constellations3.jpg
---

Among the most important results in cosmology was the discovery at the tail
end of the twentieth century of the accelerating expansion of the universe.
This result implied that around 70% of the energy density of the universe
was composed of some exotic substance given the placeholder name "dark
energy."

## A quest for two numbers

In the three decades after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background
(and with it, the verification of the big bang theory), observational
cosmology was referred to as "the quest for two numbers": the Hubble
constant and the deceleration parameter.  As it happens, both terms are
misnomers.  The Hubble constant is the rate of expansion of the universe
today and has units of 1/time (i.e., a fractional length per unit time),
although it's usually written in the more baroque, but observationally
convenient, units km/s/Mpc.  But it's inaccurate to call Hubble's constant a
constant because it changes in time.  If the universe contained only matter
(let's pretend dark energy doesn't exist), then over time the expansion of
the universe would slow down due to the gravity of the matter in the
universe.  This would mean that over time, Hubble's "constant" would get
smaller and smaller.  

It is the slowing down of the expansion of the universe that the
deceleration parameter is intended to measure.  Of course, we now know that
the expansion of the universe is speeding up rather than slowing down, so it
really should have been called the "acceleration parameter," but that wasn't
known when it was coined!

Measuring these two numbers accurately is an exceedingly difficult task and
much of observational cosmology of the second half of the twentieth century
was concerned with measuring reliable values for these numbers.  The
essential difficulty is that to measure these parameters one needs to
measure the distance of a number of objects and their recession velocity
(that is, how fast they are moving away from us).  The latter measurement is
not so difficult.  Most astrophysical sources exhibit absorption or emission
lines in their spectra.  Since the rest wavelength of a spectral line is
known (either from laboratory measurements or fundamental physics), the
redshift of a set of spectral lines can tell us the recession velocity quite
accurately.

Measurement of distances, however, is an entirely different matter.
Unfortunately for us astronomers, celestial objects don't come with signs on
them declaring how far away they are for us!  (Or maybe this is fortunate
--- if they did, astronomy would be much easier and we might be out of a
job!)  For decades, the hard problem of observational cosmology was
measuring accurate distances to distant objects.  To solve this problem one
requires what is known as a "standard candle."  (Sometimes a "standard
rular" is used, but we won't go into that here.)  A standard candle is
simply some object whose intrinsic luminosity is known.  If you measure how
bright it appears to be to you and you know its intrinsic brightness, you
can figure out how far away it must be.

## Type Ia Supernovae

By far the most useful standard candle for cosmology is the Type Ia
supernova (SN Ia).  SNe Ia are a class of supernova defined by a lack of
hydrogen and helium lines in their spectra.  They are some of the most
luminous phenomena in the universe, usually exceeding the luminosity of
their host galaxy for a month or so around their peak brightness.  
