---
layout: post
title: A guide for moving from astronomy to industry
date: 2021-08-01
categories: advice
image:
  feature: constellations3.jpg
---

TODO:
* Advantage of astronomy background is:
    * Computational
    * Math
    * Statistics
    * Most importantly, appreciation of systematics
* QSBS shares

## What do you need to best prepare for industry?

As an astronomy PhD, you will go into industry with a lot of advantages.  Over
the course of your PhD you
will develop a lot of technical skills.  The amount of math you need to
complete an astronomy PhD varies, but .  Likewise,
the amount of programming that you need to complete a PhD varies, but .  Generally you will learn how to communicate your work clearly, and
in a variety of different formats (presentations, papers, emails, etc.).  But
there are also a lot of important things that you generally don't learn in grad
school that will be useful in industry.

### Technical skills

#### Code review

#### Working with large codebases

#### Cloud technologies

* AWS / GCS / Azure
* Docker
* Kubernetes
* Github

### Soft skills

#### Collaboration

One of the things that I liked a lot about astronomy was that the field has
retained a "small science" culture.  Most papers are published by small
collaborations and many of those are one-, two-, or three-author papers.
Papers with hundreds of authors, while not exactly rare, are still not the
dominant way research gets done in the field (even if things are trending that
way).  As such, there tends to be a lot of value placed on being a good
generalist, being able to do lots of different things independently, and there
is an entrepreneurial spirit to the field which I like a lot.

Industry is different.  Unless you're one of the very first employees at a
company, you will effectively be working in a collaboration much, much larger
than anything you would have likely encountered in astronomy.

As you progress through your career, the importance of collaboration really
increases exponentially.  As an undergrad, collaboration is oftentimes
discouraged --- in many schools you are supposed to do your homework
yourself, not get the answers from your classmates, which is to say nothing
about tests, where getting answers from your classmates will get you in a lot
of trouble.  Grad school tends to encourage more collaboration, but when it
comes to your research, you are nevertheless attempting to individually
contribute something new and meaningful to the field.  This will 
likely be true of your early years as an independent contributor as well.  You'll want
to be able to point to certain things that you have done that have helped to
make the company better.  But as your career progresses it becomes less and
less important what you *individually* contribute, and more important what you
can get done by leveraging the work of others.  If you need to get a feature
working and you know that another employee would be able to .  There's always a
trade-off here between the overhead in communicating with other people (which
increases super-linearly the more people are involved), the time that you save by getting
the help of others, and the other work that they don't do because they were helping you.  One
aspect of management is trying to make these trade-offs to best move the
company forward towards its goals.

Another way to put this is that in grad school there is often an attitude that
one *should* know all there is to know about .  If you don't know something,
the onus is on you to go out and learn it.  In industry that is much .  

This is, of course, not black and white --- in academia people do collaborate
all the time to leverage complementary sets of skills.  And in industry it
doesn't hurt to expand your skillset, all else being equal.  (The catch is that
all else is generally *not* equal and you oftentimes don't have time to learn
what you need .)  The main point is that after a certain time you will start to
reach the limits of what you can create by your own individual effort.  At that
point the only way you can have a bigger impact and create something more is to
align the work of more people towards a common goal.  The advantage of this is
that .  The downside is that this typically means that you need to make a jump
from an IC to a manager which is a very different skillset.  You will have to
be more comfortable being further from the details of the work and spending a
lot more time at a high level working with lots of different people to make
sure that their efforts are as aligned as much as possible.  Some people enjoy
this kind of work, but a lot of people in academia don't!

One of the ways I like to conceptualize collaboration is that everyone is
working in a very high dimensional space.  To produce a product, the company
needs to build a vector that points in some particular direction in that space.
Every individual has vectors that point in their own unique direction and you
need to make sure that the sum of these vectors points in the direction of the
goal.  In order to make this happen, obviously these individual vectors need to
be more or less aligned --- if they are pointing in opposite directions their
work will cancel out.  But there is not going to be any single individual whose
vector points in the same direction as the goal.  In other words, you can't
take any one person, make them work really, really hard, and get a complicated
product out at the end.  You need the complementary skills of all the employees
at the company to work towards this shared goal.  This is a hard thing to do!
And it is not something you will have likely leared in grad school, at least
beyond the scale of a handful of people.  (I certainly didn't.)  

Even if you did work in a major collaboration, you will probably still find
that a reasonably sized company will require an even broader amount of
collaboration than you're used to.  Within astronomy the collaborations are
still largely technical --- you may have groups that are working on, say, the
optics of a telescope, and others working on the data reduction techniques, and
others working on determining the objects of interest --- but they are all
technical contributions.  In a company the engineering teams have to work not
only with each other, but also with the product team, the user research team,
the marketing team, the sales team, the recruiting team, along with the
executive team.  So you will have to work with people who have a much broader
set of skills than you're used to.

It is kind of hard to really appreciate what it takes to build this skill
without actually working in a company for a while (to say nothing of developing
this skill for yourself), which is generally why it takes a while for someone
to become a manager.  But I think it's important to at least be aware of this
skill so that you can deliberately see what works and doesn't work and try to
develop it in yourself.  (The best shortcut here is to start your own company and
grow it very rapidly --- but this is a very hard thing to do!  And, in fact,
most startup founders don't jump right in after graduating.  On average they
have more than 10 years of experience in other companies before starting their
own.)

### Do you need to be able to do it all?

I have listed a lot of things that you probably don't know here --- do you need
to learn them all?  Definitely not.  It's just important to be aware of what
you don't know so that you can go out and learn it over time.  Companies will
be aware of your level of experience when you apply --- if they're looking for
someone who knows all these things, they'll be hiring a more senior individual.
If they're interested in talking to you, that means they're interested in
hiring a more junior individual.  What they're looking for here is not someone
who knows everything, but someone who knows some things and will learn the rest
quickly.  (We often say that these are "high slope" vs. "high intercept"
candidates.)  So it's important to demonstrate that you are smart and a quick
learner --- you are aware of the limits of your knowledge and you are eager to
learn more.

Job hunting can be discouraging --- it can be a numbers game, and even highly
qualified candidates will get lots of rejections.  Don't take it personally.
When you get rejected, they'll usually say some variant of "it's not a good fit
at this time," and it's hard not to feel like it's your fault for not having
been better.  But after having on dozens and dozens of candidate debriefs
(startups do a lot of hiring), I can assure you that most of the time that you
get rejected, it's really more us than you.  Oftentimes the company was looking
for a very particular set of skills which youd didn't have --- which is not to
say that your skills are bad!  They were just different than what the company
needed.  Or the company was looking for a senior candidate and you were more
junior --- there is no shame in that, everyone starts out as a junior
candidate!  (The reverse can also happen!)  

I'm not sure if it is any consolation here, but the first job is definitely the
hardest to get.  Junior candidates tend to be riskier than more established
candidates.  All this is to say that it will get easier from here.  (The flip
side here is that as your career progresses, you tend to get more specialized,
which can make it harder to find a role that can best leverage your skills.)

## What kind of company should you work at?

Within astronomy we tend to talk about "industry" as an undifferentiated blob.
But there's a lot of variation in jobs and companies!  If you're making the
jump, it is important to know just what is out there because the kind of
company you apply to will influence how likely it is that you'll get the job,
and if you do, the kind of work you'll do.

### What is "industry"?

In academia, we generally refer to any job at a for-profit company as working
in "industry."  But of course, "industry" --- the entire private sector of the
economy --- is pretty vast.  There are many things you can do!  My PhD advisor
told me that by the time he was finishing his PhD, he was seriously considering
opening a sandwich shop.  After finishing a PhD, that can start to sound pretty
appealing!  Nevertheless, most astronomers don't open sandwich shops but
instead end up in a few broad sectors of the economy.

The most popular sector is the tech industry, and this is where my focus is in
this post.  That is where I ended up, so I know it best.  But it is not the
only sector!  Many astronomers end up in finance, too.  I have friends who
worked in finance and enjoyed it.  In many ways, like science, it can be a very
pure discipline.  Much like in science, your goal is to model some observed
phenomenon, it's just that this phenomenon is now in the financial markets
rather than in the heavens.  Unlike in astronomy, you get rapid feedback on how
good your model is by seeing how good its predictions were.  And determining
how good your predictions were is very easy: how much money did you make?  It
can be a lot less messy than developing a product at a tech company.  There you
oftentimes have to understand the desires of your users, which are not always
obvious.  The only other thing I can really add about finance is that, as I
understand it, the compensation structure is more focused on bonuses rather
than equity as it is in the tech world.  But that is about all I will say on
the subject.

But remember, tech and finance are just the two most common paths.  You are, of
course, welcome to do anything else with your life --- open a sandwich shop,
start an organic beet farm, or create electronic art for Burning Man.

My focus for the rest of the article will be primarily on tech companies since
that is where most former astronomers end up.  The other major industry that
hires former astronomers is finance.  I won't cover finance companies at all
because I'm not as familiar with that world.  But there are former astronomers
who have done very well in the finance industry.  

A very coarse framework is to put tech companies into three
categories:

1. FAANG-style companies: Large, well-established tech companies.
2. Smaller, older, well-established niche companies (related to "lifestyle
   businesses")
3. Startups

### FAANG-style companies

FAANG stands for Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, and Google, but the acronym
is generically used to describe any very large, well-established tech company.
So Microsoft is similarly bundled into this category as are many of the very
late-stage startups that have recently IPO'd like Airbnb, Uber, and Lyft.

Personally I think FAANG companies are a great place to start your career in
industry.  They hire lots of new grads .

#### Compensation in FAANG companies

FAANG companies have a very well defined compensation structure.  Employees are
assigned a "level" based on their experience and performance, and compensation
is closely tied to your level.  There is some variability within a level, but
in the long run your compensation is strongly tied to your level.  Each company
has its own "ladder," but Google's is well known in the industry, so I'll use
it as an example.  A new grad
fresh out of college will start out at L3.  It is usually expected that they
would then promote to L4 within about two or three years, and then to L5 (a
"senior engineer") within
another two three years.  L5 is what is known as a "terminal level."  Once you
get to L5, you can remain at L5 for the remainder of your career if you so
desire.  I've met some engineers at Google who have been at Google since the
early 2000s and remained at L5 the entire time.  But the lower levels are "up
or out."  

As a PhD, you will generally start out at L4.  

### Smaller, established companies ("lifestyle businesses")

#### Compensation in smaller companies

### Startups

#### Funding and the startup lifecycle

The defining feature of a startup is that it is a new business trying out some
new idea that has big potential .  Almost by definition, startups are not yet
self-sustaining businesses.  They do not yet bring in enough revenue to support
the business.
For example, at my current company, Whisper, we were developing a new kind of
hearing aid that uses machine learning to provide better noise reduction than
existing hearing aids.  It's a good idea, but it takes time and money to turn
the idea into a product.  When we were initially

This problem is not unique to startups.  A restaurant will also require some
capital upfront in order to get the restaurant ready before it has any sales.
The usual way of financing most businesses is with business loans from banks.
This model does not work for startups, however.  Banks are familiar with
restaurants.  They know , they know how long it takes the restaurant to get set
up and how long it will likely take before it turns a profit.  They fairly
accurately estimate the probability of failure and set the interest rate
accordingly.  But if you come
along to a bank and describe an idea for building a new kind of hearing aid
they will not give you a loan.  They have no idea how credible you are or how
to evaluate your idea.

There is therefore a separate sector of the finance industry which specializes
in funding startups, called venture capital.  Venture capitalists (VCs for
short) are much more comfortable taking risky bets on unproven ideas.  But in
order for this , they have to finance the startup in a different way than a
bank.  Most businesses get "debt financing."  They take a loan from a bank with
a well established interest rate and timeframe for payment.  This model has
less risk for the bank.  As a creditor, they are one of the first in line to
recoup assets if the company goes under, but their upside is limited.  Assuming
all goes well, the most they can make is the interest on the loan, no matter
how successful the busines is.

VCs finance startups through equity instead of debt.  Rather than *lend* the
company money, they *buy* a fraction of the business.  They give the startup,
say, $2 million and end up with 20% of the company.  Now if the company goes
bankrupt they lose all that money.  But if the company does extremely well, the
VC captures 20% of those gains as well.  Startups tend to follow a surprisingly
steep power law distribution, so a VC who invests in 30 companies can usually
make a good return as long as one or two of those companies does extremely
well.  Investing in a single company like Uber or Facebook early on can make up
for 29 Juiceros.

developing our hearing aid we had nothing to sell and the company had no
revenue.  But the company needs employees like myself to develop the product so
it needs money from somewhere to pay those employees.  (Employees are typically
by far the biggest part of a tech startup's budget.)



#### Compensation in startups

The basic trade-off you take by working for a startup is that you take a lower
salary than you otherwise be able to get in exchange for getting some ownership
in the startup.  This is a risky proposition!  Most startups fail and it
doesn't matter how much stock you own in a failed company --- it's stil
worthless.  However, if the startup does very well and grows a lot, you stand
to make *far* more than you could at any other job.  Every time you read in the
news about a tech company doing an IPO, there are easily dozens, and likely
hundreds, of early employees who make millions of dollars.

*I would not recommend working at a startup for the money.*  In the tech world
it's called the "startup lottery" for good reason.  Odds are that the startup
you join will fail and you would have been better off (financially anyway)
working at a FAANG and taking a higher salary.

That doesn't mean you shouldn't work for a startup!  .  Plus, while it is true
that the median startup fails,
sometimes you come across a startup that does seem to have
better-than-average odds of success.

##### Understanding employee stock options

Unlike at FAANG companies, early-stage startups typically provide equity to
their employees in the form of stock options.  (There are several types of
stock options, which I won't go into here.)  The way stock options work is that
the company gives you the *option* to buy, for example, up to 100,000 shares at
$1 per share.  Thus you now have the opportunity to give the company $100,000
and get 100,000 shares in return.  This is a good deal if one day the company
IPOs and shares become worth $100.  Now you can pay $100,000 and immediately
turn around and sell those 100,000 shares for $10,000,000.  (Don't worry if you
don't happen to have $100,000 on hand.  This is a common enough situation that
banks can lend you that money for the short duration of time it takes to
exercise the options and sell the shares.)

But you don't have to do this!  If you don't think that the company is going to
be worth anything, you can just forget that the options exist and take your
salary.

Why don't they just give you the shares instead?  One big reason is taxes.
Suppose you start working at the company and the stock is worth $1 per share.
Well, even if the company is very successful, it won't IPO at $100 per share
overnight.  Let's say that before the IPO the company raised a Series E at $50
per share.  Now you're getting 25,000 shares per year, which is a total
compensation $1.25 million.  Pretty nice!  Except you need to pay taxes on that
income --- that will probably be around $600,000 if you live in California.
But because the company is still private (no IPO yet!) you can't sell those
shares.  Since your salary is probably in the range of $100k to $200k, you
wouldn't be able to pay your taxes even if you used 100% of your salary!

If the startup gives you options instead you don't have this problem.  The kind
of options you get at a startup are not considered income --- you only get the
income when you *exercise* them.

###### Liquidity

###### Golden handcuffs

But options are not without their shortcomings.  A common feature of startup
options is that if you ever leave the company, you usually do not have all that
much time, maybe a few weeks, to exercise your options --- otherwise they
expire and become worthless.  This can lead to a situation known as "golden
handcuffs".  If you were an early employee at a successful startup, your
options might be worth millions of dollars, but you can't exercise them because
you can't pay the taxes until the company IPOs and you can sell your shares.
Meanwhile, you might hate your job, but can't leave because if you do, your
options would expire and you'd lose millions of dollars!

You don't even have to leave the company for your options to expire!  It's also
common for options to expire after ten years regardless of whether you are
still at the company or not.

###### The 83(b) election

We're getting a bit in the weeds here, but the 83(b) election is one of those
things that can really screw you over.  This won't apply to most people reading
this, but if it does apply to you, it's very, very important to know about.
This situation was happening frequently enough that in the late 1990s, Congress
amended the tax code to allow for the "83(b) election" to help fix this.

The idea is with an 83(b) election you can exercise all your options on your
first day.  This involves filling out a special form and mailing it to the IRS.
(Use certified mail!)  Now you actually 

The downside of the 83(b) election is that it forces you to invest early in the
company and take financial risk.  The advantage of options is that if the
company fails, you don't lose any money.  Sure your options turned out to be
worthless and you could have made more working at a FAANG, but you won't lose
any personal savings.  But when you exercise your options, you might be writing
a check for a few tens of thousands of dollars.  If the company fails, you lose
that money, too.

So there are 

## Getting an industry job

### Who is hiring?



### Your resume

### The interview process

### Rejection and acceptance

## Resources

* Hacker News
* Full Stack Python
* MIT missing semester course
* Levels.fyi
