---
layout: post
title: When My Left Lung Collapsed
categories: personal
image:
  feature: constellations3.jpg
---

## Onset

Sunday, February 10, 2019 began as a wonderful day.  I showered in the morning
and I distinctly remember feeling well rested and all around quite good.  But as
I was drying off I felt a sharp pain in my upper back like I had pulled a muscle
or pinched a nerve.

I started to suspect that something was amiss as my wife and I walked to mass
that morning.  Our church is down a pretty steep hill from our apartment, so
getting there is normally easy, but I was needing to walk pretty slowly.  By
coincidence my wife had gone to the gym for the first time after a break, so her
legs were pretty sore and we both sort of hobbled to mass together.  On the way
back up the hill I was able to (slowly) make it back to the apartment, but I had
to stop to catch my breath, which I never had to do.

Over the course of the day I found that I had trouble taking deep breaths.  I
was reading the Decameron at the time, so to test myself I would try reading a
passage to my wife, but I usually wasn't able to make it through an entire
sentence.  I didn't really feel like moving very much, but apart from that and
the fact that I couldn't take a full breath, I felt fine.  Nevertheless, that
evening I made a doctor's appointment.  Fortunately there was an opening early
the next morning.  *Note: If you have symptoms where you're having trouble
breathing and can't take a full breath, don't do what I did.  Go straight to the
emergency room.* 

By nighttime I was starting to feel pretty crappy.  It was too painful to lay on
my back or my left side, so I went to sleep laying on my right side.  But after
a while that started to become painful, too, so I moved to the couch and slept
for a while sitting up.  I ended up alternating between sleeping for a bit
sitting up and going back to bed to lay on my right side.

## At the doctor

The following morning I felt completely miserable.  I somehow managed to take a
shower (my last for more than a week as it would turn out), but it was too
painful to bend over so I had a hard time drying my legs.  With some careful
gymnastics I managed to put on my pants, but I couldn't put my shoes on so I
left in my slippers instead.  I booked a Lyft and took slow, uncomfortable
journey through the heavy San Francisco Monday morning traffic to the hospital.

When I arrived the nurse took my vitals and then the doctor came to see me.  I
told her that I was having trouble taking deep breaths and had a lot of pain
when I bent over or lay on my back or left side.  She said, "It sounds like
you're having trouble breathing!"  She listened to my lungs and said that there
was definitely an issue with my left lung and there was possibly some fluid in
it.  She sent me to get an X-ray and told me that she was going to call the
emergency doctor in the meantime.

I hobbled on over to the floor with the radiology department to get my X-ray,
and after about twenty minutes or so hobbled on back to the original room.  (I
was actually carrying my laptop bag with me at the time because I was under some
delusion, maybe born out of hopefulness that my condition wasn't actually all
that serious, that I was going to go in to work after my appointment.)  After a
few minutes my doctor came back and said, "So... we're going to call 911."  She
told me that my left lung had collapsed, and then a few minutes later introduced
me to the emergeency doctor and two SFFD paramedics who were going to take me to
the emergency room by ambulance.  The paramedics had brought
a guerney with them, but I told them I felt well enough to walk down to the
ambulance (after all, I had just walked to get my X-ray!), but they told me that
under no circumstances was I going to walk myself.  I told them that under no
circumstances was I going to lay down in the guerney because it would be
incredibly painful, but fortunately it was fancy enough to transform into an
upright seated position and they .

The ambulance ride itself was fairly uneventful.  I had never been in an
ambulance before so I made some small talk with the paramedics in the back with
me, and tried to ignore my
heart rate approaching 130 bpm.  Although 

I was a little surprised that a doctor would have to call 911 for a medical
emergency given that I was already in a hospital!  But evidently in my condition
I needed to go to the emergency room.

## Emergency room

## Surgery

## Recovery
