---
layout: post
title: What are the progenitors of Type Ia supernovae?
date: 2014-12-20
categories: unsolved-problems
image:
  feature: constellations3.jpg
---

## Dark energy's dark secret

I discussed in a [previous article][1] one of the most important discoveries
in all of astronomy --- the discovery of dark energy.  Key to this is an
accurate measurement of the distances and recessional velocities of distant
galaxies.  For this, cosmologists have used Type Ia supernovae.  

Type Ia supernovae are ideal for cosmological measurements.  They are
extremely bright, so they can be viewed at very large distances.  And even
more importantly, they are empirically observed to occur at the same
intrinsic luminosity (at least once a few corrections have been made).  This
means that when a Type Ia supernova is observed, one can determine how far
away it must be based on how bright it is observed to be.  There is one
problem with using Type Ia supernovae for cosmological measurements --- it
is not known what they are.

## What we do know about Type Ia supernovae

Strictly speaking, the Type Ia classification is a *spectroscopic*
classification.  It is important to note that the classification does not
really care what the supernova *is*, only on the spectral features it has.
A Type Ia supernova spectrum has the following characteristics:

1. No hydrogen lines in the spectrum
2. No helium lines in the spectrum
3. Silicon lines are present in the spectrum

And that is it.  Other supernova classes have different spectral lines in
their spectra.  Despite the fact that this classification scheme is not
based on what the supernova really *is*, it so happens that Type Ia
supernovae are physically quite different from other kinds of supernova,
which are collectively referred to as core-collapse supernovae.  Although
there are many open questions about core-collapse supernovae, the basic
picture is that core collapse supernovae occur when massive stars (at least
8 $M\_{\odot}$) run out of nuclear fuel to burn at the end of their lives. 

Type Ia supernovae are a completely different kind of phenomenon.  What we
do know from the spectroscopic properties and the shape of the light curve
is that Type Ia supernovae are exploding white dwarfs.  Most white dwarfs
are made principally of carbon and oxygen, and in certain circumstances (not
entirely well understood) the carbon and oxgyen can be made to undergo a
runaway thermonuclear reaction.  In this reaction, the carbon and oxygen of
the white dwarf burns all the way to $^{56}$Ni, which is an unstable isotope
with a half-life of 9 days.  The $^{56}$Ni then decays to $^{56}$Co, which
is also unstable with a half-life of 114 days.  The $^{56}$Co then decays to
$^{56}$Fe, which is stable.  It is the radioactive decay of nickel and
cobalt that powers the light curve of the supernova.

The central question of the Type Ia supernova progenitor problem is: **What
causes the white dwarf to explode?**  An isolated white dwarf is stable, so
some companion must be present.  But it is unknown what the companion is.
We here describe the competing models.  

## The single-degenerate model

Until recently the single-degenerate model was the model typically taught in
introductory astronomy classes and textbooks.  If you had heard of Type Ia
supernova at all before but hadn't heard about the progenitor problem, you
probably learned the single-degenerate model.  The single-degenerate model
is so named because there is only one white dwarf (i.e., degenerate object).
The companion is some other star, possibly a main sequence star or possibly
some sort of evolved star, like a red giant or an AGB star.  At some point
during the lifetime of the companion star, its radius increases as it
evolves.  If the radius increases enough, it can fill its [Roche lobe][2].
When this happens, the outer atmosphere of the star will become unbound, and
some fraction of it will stream to the white dwarf, where it will form an
accretion disk and eventually settle onto the surface of the white dwarf.

Over time, then, the white dwarf will grow by accreting matter from its
companion.  The white dwarf cannot do this indefinitely, however, because
there is a maximum mass for which it is possible for the white dwarf to
support itself against gravity, known as the [Chandrasekhar mass][3].  Once
the white dwarf exceeds this mass, the white dwarf collapses, ignites a
thermonuclear chain reaction, and explodes.  

The advantage of the single degenerate model is that it elegantly explains
why nearly all Type Ia supernovae have very similar luminosities.  There
are, however, two principal difficulties with the single degenerate model,
both related to the observational fact that no hydrogen is observed in the
spectrum.  The first is that it turns out to be very difficult for the white
dwarf to accrete matter from its companion in a way consistent with
observations.  If the white dwarf accretes matter too quickly, it builds up
a large hydrogen or helium atmosphere which engulfs its own Roche lobe,
leading to common envelope evolution.  But if the white dwarf accretes
matter too slowly, it builds up a thin, cold degenerate hydrogen atmosphere.
Once the atmosphere gets heavy enough, it can rapidly ignite hydrogen
burning.  This then causes a small explosion in the hydrogen atmosphere of
the white dwarf which blows away the rest of the accreted material, leading
to no net mass gain.  There seems to be only a small range of mass transfer
rates (only a factor of a few wide) within which it is possbile for the
white dwarf to steadily gain mass.  To achieve these mass transfer rates is
certainly possible in some systems, but seems to require fine tuning in
general. 

The second difficulty with the single degenerate model is simply the lack of
hydrogen observed in the spectrum.  The white dwarf is accreting hydrogen,
and although the hydrogen on the surface of the white dwarf immediately
burns into helium, one would expect that some of the hydrogen in the
accretion disk would appear in the spectrum.  In fact, the energy of the
shock from the explosion on the companion star would have the effect of
puffing it up, increasing its luminosity, and emitting light in the spectral
lines of hydrogen.  Yet even very deep spectra of nearby Type Ia supernovae
have not revealed any hydrogen in the spectrum at all.  It is difficult to
reconcile these modern observational constrains with the single degenerate
model, and for this reason the double degenerate model has begun to become
more popular.

## The double-degenerate model

In the double degenerate model there are two white dwarfs instead of one.
In any binary system, the two objects will lose orbital energy due to
gravitational radiation and the orbit will shrink.  Given enough time, the
orbit of two white dwarfs will shrink to the point that they merge and
coalesce into a single white dwarf.  If the merger product exceeds the
Chandrasekhar mass, the white dwarf may then collapse and explode as a Type
Ia supernova.  

The difficulty with the double degenerate model has historically been the
assumption above of "given enough time."  One can look out in the universe
and count up the number of white dwarf-white dwarf binaries at various
orbital sizes and then estimate the rate at which they should merge in the
Galaxy.  These estimates are generally at least an order of magnitude
smaller than the observed rate of Type Ia supernovae.

## The triple scenario

The newest model has come to be known as the *triple scenario*.  The triple
scenario is similar to the double degenerate model, but with a twist ---
rather than proposing that isolated WD-WD binaries are the progenitors of
Type Ia supernovae, we suppose that these binaries have tertiary companions
in a distant orbit.  The tertiary doesn't have to be a white dwarf.  In
fact, any old star will do.  This situation is not as uncommon as one might
suppose --- about 10% of all systems in the Galaxy are triple systems.

The key to the triple scenario is that if the orbit of the tertiary is at a
high inclination relative to the inner WD-WD binary, it will induce
Kozai-Lidov oscillations in the inner binary.  Over time, it will cause the
eccentricity of the inner binary to oscillate from relatively small values
to extremely large values. 

## Other models

[1]: ../../classics/accelerating-universe
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roche_lobe
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandrasekhar_limit
